Gatbsy typescript post (#14)
franleplant/nosleepjavascript-blog: content/blog/gatbsy-typescript/index.md

---
title: Adding Typescript to your Gatbsy application
date: "2020-05-10"
author: franleplant
description: "Docker has become a widely used
  technology and chances are you are going to have to deal with it eventually, at least superficially, in your Front End
  career. Let's cover the basic concepts and day to day useful commands you will likely use when dealing with Docker."
tags:
  - gatsbyjs
  - javascript
  - react
  - typescript
  - graphql
---

## Intro

I have been using Typescript for the past 4 years in different production
projects in different companies and although this post is not meant to be
a _why typescript?_ post let me tell you briefly why I love typescript
and why I do think that most medium to largse size Javascript applications
would benefit from using Typescript, in no particular order:

1- automatically up-to-date and synchronized code documentation in the form of types.
2- new code verification tool added to your pool (in javascript apps this is mostly made of different kinds of tests and lints)
3- better development experience: better autocompletion and api discovery
4- type checker guided hassle free refactoring

> 5- improve the mind set of developers so that they think more about data structures and their semantic meaning inside the code (as oposed to just have a bunch of unamed and uncategorized objects which is something that tends to happen in bigger javascript apps).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5- improve the mindset of developers so that they think more about data structures and their semantic meaning inside the code (as opposed to just have a bunch of unnamed and uncategorized objects which is something that tends to happen in bigger javascript apps).
```

Author: I think you start making a "review" when I first submit the PR and then finish it when I tell you it is ready to be reviewed (which might take couple of days). This makes your comments be on an outdated piece of code. 

You might want to make these comments as "simple comments" instead of reviews or simply submit reviews early on so that your comments don't get outdated.

Or... we might not be using github's UI correctly jajaja

> I plan to talk a lot more about this in a follow up post so that is why I wont focus to much

Reviewer: won't

explaining these points, but please note that most of these come from real world experiences

> handling large production code bases in both Javascript and Typescript, and there is an abysm between the too.

Reviewer: two*

Author: to two too chu

Additionally, from a business standpoint we can also enumerate derived benefits:

- more productivity: items 1, 3 and 4
- higher quality: items 2, 4 and 5

Having these in mind we are going to cover how to integrate Typescript to Gatsby,
considering that Gatbsy is a framework that can accomodote larger production applications that
will benefit the most out of this.

The process is rather simple but I want to cover some paint points and tips and tricks.

Note: This blog is actually using Typescript.

## How to use Typescript in your Gatbsy.js site.

> We are going to install two plugins:

Reviewer: first plugin appears to be included in Gatsby which might be worth mentioning

Author: it is included in the `gatsby-starter-blog`, Im trying to make this more general to any gatsby application

- [gatsby-plugin-graphql-codegen](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/packages/gatsby-plugin-graphql-codegen/) to automatically generate Typescript types out of the underlying graphql data model that Gatsby uses.

After following the instructions you will have most of the tools, the rest is going to be
related to 1) configuration and 2) migrating js files.

## Configuration

### Typescript

You will need to create a `tsconfig.json` at the root of your project configuring the
typescript compiler. This can vary a lot depending on your taste but here's the one we are using:

```json
{
  "compilerOptions": {
    "target": "esnext",
    "module": "commonjs",
    "jsx": "preserve",
    "strict": true,
    "noImplicitAny": true,
    "strictNullChecks": false,
    "strictFunctionTypes": true,
    "noImplicitThis": true,
    "alwaysStrict": true,
    "noUnusedLocals": true,
    "noUnusedParameters": true,
    "noImplicitReturns": true,
    "noFallthroughCasesInSwitch": true,
    "allowSyntheticDefaultImports": true,
    "esModuleInterop": true
  },
  "include": ["src/**/*"]
}
```

> I wont cover all the options but I do want to cover `strictNullChecks`.

Reviewer: won't

Reviewer: I also think it's a good idea to explain what `strictNullChecks` does before going on to explain how it was problematic.

Author: done!

> I found that enabling this option to be a big pain when convining it with the GraphQL codegen tool.

Reviewer: combining*

Most of the automatically generated types from the queries you make around your codebase
will have a lot of optionals and `Maybe` making it super verbose and sometimes super
awkard to handle all these in a strict way.

I usually try to use `strictNullChecks: true` for applications because it makes the typechecking
to provide even more guarantees about your code, but in this particular application I recommend
you avoid it altogether.

At this stage you might want to `allowJs: true` to avoid having to migrate _all_ your codebase
at once. But you should probably migrate some of the core files just to verify the setup.

The process is rather simple, any `.js` file that jas `JSX` inside it should be renamed to `.tsx`,
if not, it should be rename to `.ts`.

Let the compiler tell you what it expects from those freshly migrated files (see next section): spoiler alert,
it will ask for props definitions and perhaps some dependencies type definitions.

### `declarations.d.ts`

In most Typescript codebases we have some global types or some untyped modules to declare,

> that is why you most likely will need `src/declaration.d.ts`. Let's see a bair minimum one:

Reviewer: bare minimum*

```typescript
// Make typescript aware of this
// global Gatbsy variable
declare var __PATH_PREFIX__: string

// Declare that this modules are untyped
declare module "typography-theme-github"
declare module "vfile-message"
// This makes importing svg images
// typecheck. You might need
// to declare other types of files
// used in your codebase
declare module "*.svg"
```

> And then you should import this file from your `gatsby-browser.js` which

Reviewer: "import from" sounds a little confusing to me, imho it should be "import this file *on/in* gatsby-browser.js..." 
mainly because import statements can be "import * **from** whatever" which is the other way around

Author: done

is the main entry point of the browser application:

```javascript
import "./src/declarations.d.ts"
```

### Typechecking

> As the typescript plugin docs state, by default it wont run typechecks on your code, it

Reviewer: won't*

> will only strip out any type information and typescript sintax and compile it down to Javascript.

Reviewer: syntax*

For enabling typechecking you will need to create an npm script:

```json
"typecheck": "tsc --noEmit",
```

`tsc` is the Typescript Compiler and `noEmit` tells it that we only want to typecheck.

I also call this script from my `test` script because I want to always pass this verification,
which as one of the reasons I had to add it.

You will probably need to install type definitions for some libraries you might be using by
`yarn add --dev @types/my-lib` if they exist or simply declaring them as untyped.
When typechecking your code base the typescript compiler will let you know what to do
pretty acurately in each case.

**NOTE**: I configured this in March 2020 and I had some troubles with Gatbsy type definitions, in
order to fix it I had to add this to my `package.json#resolutions` field:

```json
"resolutions": {
  "unified": "7.1.0",
  "vfile": "4.0.3",
  "@types/vfile": "4.0.0"
},
```

If you see a type error relating these libraries this might be fix for you.

### gatsby-plugin-typescript

> I did not made any special configurations to this plugin.

Reviewer: make*

Author: done

### gatsby-plugin-graphql-codegen

Here is where things become more complicated.

The main data layer of Gatbsy is Grapqhl and most of the pages
and some components will acess that data layer and that data will
flow through props and context down the component tree.

> So it is reasonable to expect to somehow have thata data model

Reviewer: that*

and the queries we make out of it to by statically typed.

You can of course write these types by hand but it will be much better
to have a tool automatically generate those files from the latest queries
and GraphQL data model. Enter: `gatsby-plugin-graphql-codegen`.

This is how I recommend you configure it:

```typescript
{
  resolve: `gatsby-plugin-graphql-codegen`,
  options: {
    codegenConfig: {

>       // optional if you prefix, as I do,

Reviewer: explain why it could be convenient maybe? 
I recall seeing that and being unsure regarding why it would be that way when it was first implemented (I still don't really know)

Author: done

      // all your types with I
      typesPrefix: "I",
      avoidOptionals: true,
    },
  },
}
```

The `avoidOptionals` is important because the codegen tools generate
most of the types with the following shape:

```typescript
export type SomeGeneratedType = {
  attribute?: Maybe<Type>
}
```

This evaluates to something like `Type | null | undefined`, so you basically have three potential types instead
of just the two you actually epect: `Type | null` which is what `Maybe<Type>` resolves to.

> So this will reduce some of the more awkard errors when passing props.

Reviewer: awkward*

Additionally, it is better to create your own types instead of trying to reuse the types that the
codegen genrates.

For example in this blog we have an `data/authors.yaml`.
The codegen generates this type

```typescript
export type IAuthorYaml = INode & {
  id: Scalars["ID"]
  parent: Maybe<INode>
  children: Array<INode>
  internal: IInternal
  bio: Maybe<Scalars["String"]>
  profilepicture: Maybe<IFile>
  twitter: Maybe<Scalars["String"]>
  github: Maybe<Scalars["String"]>
}
```

but the pages that make the query might generate different variantes of this type. Sometime shaving

> some fields off sometimes others and in particular the profilepicture filed whihc maps to an image

Reviewer: which*

might be altered in several ways like asking for a sharp image fluid.

> IN that case this type wont be useful at all.

Reviewer: won't
